Distance function on real numbers (#1394)
UniMath/agda-unimath: src/real-numbers/distance-real-numbers.lagda.md

open import elementary-number-theory.additive-group-of-rational-numbers
open import elementary-number-theory.difference-rational-numbers
open import elementary-number-theory.positive-rational-numbers
open import elementary-number-theory.rational-numbers

open import foundation.action-on-identifications-functions
open import foundation.dependent-pair-types
open import foundation.identity-types
open import foundation.logical-equivalences
open import foundation.transport-along-identifications
open import foundation.universe-levels

open import real-numbers.absolute-value-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.addition-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.dedekind-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.difference-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.inequality-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.metric-space-of-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.negation-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.nonnegative-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.rational-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.similarity-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.strict-inequality-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.transposition-addition-subtraction-cuts-dedekind-real-numbers
```

</details>

## Idea

> The distance between two [real numbers](real-numbers.dedekind-real-numbers.md)

Reviewer: concept distance

is the [absolute value](real-numbers.absolute-value-real-numbers.md) of their
[difference](real-numbers.difference-real-numbers.md).

## Definition

```agda
dist-ℝ : {l1 l2 : Level} → ℝ l1 → ℝ l2 → ℝ (l1 ⊔ l2)
dist-ℝ x y = abs-ℝ (x -ℝ y)
```

### The distance function is commutative

```agda
abstract
  commutative-dist-ℝ :
    {l1 l2 : Level} → (x : ℝ l1) (y : ℝ l2) → dist-ℝ x y ＝ dist-ℝ y x
  commutative-dist-ℝ x y =
    inv (abs-neg-ℝ _) ∙ ap abs-ℝ (distributive-neg-diff-ℝ x y)
```

### Distances are nonnegative

```agda
abstract
  is-nonnegative-dist-ℝ :
    {l1 l2 : Level} → (x : ℝ l1) (y : ℝ l2) → is-nonnegative-ℝ (dist-ℝ x y)
  is-nonnegative-dist-ℝ _ _ = is-nonnegative-abs-ℝ _
```

> ### Relationship to the metric space of real numbers
> 
> ```agda

Reviewer: Could you please add a sentence describing the relationship? E.g.

````suggestion
### Relationship to the metric space of real numbers

Two real numbers `x` and `y` share an `ε`-neighborhood if and only if the distance between them is less than `ε`.

```agda
````

          ( q)
          ( x -ℝ real-ℚ d)
          ( transpose-add-is-in-lower-cut-ℝ x q d q+d<x))
        ( swap-right-diff-leq-ℝ x y (real-ℚ d) x-y≤d))

  neighborhood-leq-dist-ℝ :
    {l : Level} → (d : ℚ⁺) (x y : ℝ l) →
    leq-ℝ (dist-ℝ x y) (real-ℚ (rational-ℚ⁺ d)) →
    is-in-neighborhood-leq-ℝ l d x y
  neighborhood-leq-dist-ℝ d⁺@(d , _) x y |x-y|≤d =
    ( lower-neighborhood-leq-diff-ℝ
      ( d⁺)
      ( y)
      ( x)
      ( tr
        ( λ z → leq-ℝ z (real-ℚ d))
        ( distributive-neg-diff-ℝ _ _)
        ( transitive-leq-ℝ
          ( neg-ℝ (x -ℝ y))
          ( abs-ℝ (x -ℝ y))
          ( real-ℚ d)
          ( |x-y|≤d)
          ( neg-leq-abs-ℝ _))) ,
      lower-neighborhood-leq-diff-ℝ
      ( d⁺)
      ( x)
      ( y)
      ( transitive-leq-ℝ
        ( x -ℝ y)
        ( abs-ℝ (x -ℝ y))
        ( real-ℚ d)
        ( |x-y|≤d)
        ( leq-abs-ℝ _)))

  neighborhood-iff-leq-dist-ℝ :
    {l : Level} → (d : ℚ⁺) (x y : ℝ l) →
    is-in-neighborhood-leq-ℝ l d x y ↔
    leq-ℝ (dist-ℝ x y) (real-ℚ (rational-ℚ⁺ d))
  neighborhood-iff-leq-dist-ℝ d x y =
    ( leq-dist-neighborhood-ℝ d x y ,
      neighborhood-leq-dist-ℝ d x y)
```

### Triangle inequality

> ```agda

Reviewer: Please add a link to this entry under "The triangle inequality" in `literature.100-theorems`.

Reviewer: I think the current policy we operate under is to only give credit to the first author of a theorem, although we haven't discussed this.

abstract
  triangle-inequality-dist-ℝ :
    {l1 l2 l3 : Level} (x : ℝ l1) (y : ℝ l2) (z : ℝ l3) →
    leq-ℝ (dist-ℝ x z) (dist-ℝ x y +ℝ dist-ℝ y z)
  triangle-inequality-dist-ℝ x y z =
    preserves-leq-left-sim-ℝ
      ( dist-ℝ x y +ℝ dist-ℝ y z)
      ( abs-ℝ (x -ℝ y +ℝ y -ℝ z))
      ( abs-ℝ (x -ℝ z))
      ( preserves-sim-abs-ℝ
        ( similarity-reasoning-ℝ
          x -ℝ y +ℝ y -ℝ z
          ~ℝ (x -ℝ y +ℝ y) -ℝ z by sim-eq-ℝ (inv (associative-add-ℝ _ _ _))
          ~ℝ x -ℝ z by
            preserves-sim-right-add-ℝ
              ( neg-ℝ z)
              ( x -ℝ y +ℝ y)
              ( x)
              ( cancel-right-diff-add-ℝ x y)))
      ( triangle-inequality-abs-ℝ (x -ℝ y) (y -ℝ z))
```

> ### Bounding distances

Reviewer: This header is too non-descript. Either add an explanation, or make the header describe in more detail

open import elementary-number-theory.positive-rational-numbers
open import elementary-number-theory.rational-numbers

open import foundation.action-on-identifications-functions
open import foundation.dependent-pair-types
open import foundation.identity-types
open import foundation.logical-equivalences
open import foundation.transport-along-identifications
open import foundation.universe-levels

open import real-numbers.absolute-value-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.addition-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.dedekind-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.difference-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.inequality-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.metric-space-of-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.negation-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.nonnegative-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.rational-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.similarity-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.strict-inequality-real-numbers
open import real-numbers.transposition-addition-subtraction-cuts-dedekind-real-numbers
```

</details>

## Idea

The
{{#concept "distance function" Disambiguation="between real numbers" Agda=dist-ℝ}}

> between two [real numbers](real-numbers.dedekind-real-numbers.md) measures how

Reviewer: The sentence should read either "the distance between two real numbers" or "the distance function on real numbers"
